---
created_at: 2022-07-14
index: 1
slug: 'initial-commit'
title: 'Initial Commit'
---

<script>
    import FootnoteContainer from '$lib/components/blog/footnote_container.svelte';
    import OnTheWind from '$lib/components/blog/on_the_wind.svelte';
    import NoteEntry from '$lib/components/blog/note_entry.svelte';
    import NoteLink from '$lib/components/blog/note_link.svelte';
</script>

<!-- I'd like end template to handle a sub-hed somehow -->

# Initial Commit: the first steps of building an app

Years ago, my then-girlfriend now-wife asked me to build a to-do app for her. Her request was straightforward: a pretty app – she was eager for desert tones – where she could track things that need doing.

The ask was technically straightforward. Many coding tools show how to build a to-do list as a simple example. And I never built it.

Her excitement got me excited, though. I thought about it often: features, technologies, names, and more.

Now, years later, I'm committing. It's time to build.

## The way I'll build

What I'm building matters less than how I build it. A few statements:

- My goal is to build with care and love. If I can manage to do that, the rest will flow.

<!-- [Three things](https://twitter.com/search?q=from%3Avisakanv%20show%20up%20don%27t%20die&src=typed_query):
- Show up
- Don't die
- Don't quit -->

<!-- embed this tweet somehow: https://twitter.com/visakanv/status/1470745038397136902?s=20&t=GFoVjZ7aKVEGkxswg9ayJA -->

- I am documenting the journey to help crystallize my thinking, create a record to learn from, and to enjoy and practice writing.
- I expect I will grow as I come to understand what I already know: there is joy and satisfaction in making stuff you enjoy.
- In the spirit of Visa's [Do 100 Thing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FEIz3PlKfFk), I plan to make 100 updates to this project. This is the first!

Let's go!

## What I'm building

My wife initially asked for a pretty to-do app. After mulling it over for a long time, I've shifted to building beautiful, remixable checklists.

### Checklists

Checklists are great. Atul Gawande's [The Checklist Manifesto](http://atulgawande.com/book/the-checklist-manifesto/) is a great book about how checklists can help people deal with complexity. His main point is that we frequently make mistakes not from ignorance (we don't know enough), but from ineptitude (we don't apply what we know). Checklists are simple, powerful tools that can help you apply what you know, whether you're performing surgery or packing for a trip.

### Remixable

I want to make checklists even more useful. First, we can use digital tools to make reusing checklists easy. That also allows you to refine a list over time.

Next, let's make them remixable. That's the working descriptor for the idea of making a checklist from other sub-checklists. Let's take camping as an example. We love camping, and there's always a bunch of gear we need to pack for each trip. For starters, we need a tent.

```
Camping Checklist
[] Tent
```

Beyond the tent, though, what we need begins to depend on the type of camping trip. If we're backpacking, we'll need to pack lighter to ensure everything can be carried; if we're car-camping, anything that'll fit in the truck bed can come along.

```
Camping Checklist
-- Always required:
[] Tent
    -- If backpacking:
    [] Minimalist camp chair
    [] CamelBak water pouch, 3-liter
    -- If car camping:
    [] Camp chair, luxury
    [] Water jug, 7-gallon 
```

What we pack also depends on who's camping. Are we bringing the dog?

```
Camping Checklist
[] Tent
    -- If backpacking:
    [] Camp chair, minimalist
    [] CamelBak water pouch, 3-liter
        -- If dog is joining:
        [] Dog bed, compact
    -- If car camping:
    [] Camp chair, luxury
    [] Water jug, 7-gallon 
        -- If dog is joining:
        [] Dog bed, plush
```

That's the idea of remixable checklists: a set of sub-lists that can be composed together to create a checklist that matches your needs. The goal of the app is to make that easy.

### Beautiful

The app should be beautiful – and not just because my wife said so.

A checklist app is a very heady, very functional, very yes-or-no sort of app. I want to balance that by making room for the stuff in between, for the mysterious and the grand, for the heart of it all. I want the app to care for both the forest and the trees.

Exploring how to actually achieve that will be a meaningful challenge, I expect. Who knows if I'll be able to pull it off. It's important to try.

## What I've got so far

So far, I only have ideas. A bunch of beautiful ideas. That, and this git repository<NoteLink key="git-repo"></NoteLink>. And, well, this update.

I don't even have anywhere to publish the update. One of the ideas, of course, is to build a website to host a blog for all the updates. That site will come, as will everything else. I'll figure out how to build it. That's the point.

The ideas, the git repo, and this post. A good start.

What's next?

<OnTheWind>

- [Theo](https://twitter.com/t3dotgg)'s passion for the craft of coding and his generosity to share it
- [Simon](https://twitter.com/simonsarris)'s example to build a life you love, one thing at a time
- [Saib](https://open.spotify.com/artist/6N4HlHINMvoTyAL0yhBUCk)'s very good melodies and beats
- Ira Glass on [The Gap](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2wLP0izeJE) between taste and capability

</OnTheWind>

<FootnoteContainer>
<NoteEntry key="git-repo">A git repository is a tool software developers commonly use to store their code and to track changes they make to it. I'm using it for that, plus to store the update you're reading now. I expect the repository to hold just about every part of the project – except user data, which will be stored in a database – as it continues to grow.</NoteEntry>
</FootnoteContainer>
