---
author_name:
created_at: 2022-07-25
description: Is it a game? Yes and no.
index: 3
published: true
slug: on-gamification
title: On Gamification
---

# On Gamification

_Disclaimer: I'm no expert on this topic; this update describes my current knowledge and thinking._

"Gamification" is the addition of game-like elements – distinct challenges, competition, rewards, etc. – to something.

Baking bread is not a game: you mix flower, water, salt, and yeast; give it a few turns; shape dough into loaves; and bake. If you have a bake-off, however, you're begining to gamify bread. Now there's competition with the neighbor two doors down for the blue ribbon.

Creators of mobile game apps popularized the idea of gamification for software. Candy Crush, for instance, is just a puzzle at its heart. The creators gamified that puzzle by adding levels, adding shiny buttons and bright colors, awarding points, assigning challenges, instigating competition, and providing a sense of progress. Those elements created a hit game that kept users coming back and, for a small group of users, motivated in-app purchases.

I don't want to build the app that way. My knee-jerk reaction is to declare that I won't ever use gamification to manipulate you – ever.

That's an overreaction.

It comes from a desire to care for you, as a user, and a blind rejection of manipulating your behavior. That desire is well-intended and wrong. _Of course_ I want to manipulate you! That's the point of the app: to offer a better way to use checklists. It should change your behavior.

Gamificaiton, then, is a tool. Like most tools, it can provide great utility when used well and can create great harm when misused. Mindful use of this tool seems wiser than blind rejection.

## How might I use it?

I'm still figuring out how I might use elements of gamification in the app. While I know I don't want to go full Candy Crush, I don't know exactly where the sweet spot on the spectrum is.

For now, acknowledging that gamification is a effective tool that I want to pay attention to while building the app seems enough.

## Example I like: Breath of the Wild

Lately, I have been playing The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. It's an action-adventure video game that I'm really enjoying.

I particularly appreciate the game's shrine challenges. The shrines are dotted across the world for the player to discover. Entering the shrine takes you to a place apart, where a monk has prepared a puzzle-challenge for you to overcome.

The reward for completing the challenge is beautiful: the spirit of the monk, frozen in time, congratulates you, saying:

> "Your resourcefulness in overcoming this trial speaks to the promise of a hero. May the goddess smile upon you."

I love that! The challenge is typically a puzzle that takes a few minutes to get right, and yet the affirmation and blessing transforms it into a meaningful accomplishment that marks my progress and reminds me of ties to things greater.

Can I do something similar? How can the app bring you somewhere apart where you can overcome your challenges? How can it affirm you as a user, recognize your efforts as a significant part of grander things, and to offer a blessing to go with you on your way?
