---
author_name:
created_at: 2022-07-18
description: Continuing the age-old tradition of talking about working, instead of actually working.
index: 2
published: true
slug: talkin-shop
title: Talkin' Shop
---

<!-- I'd like end template to handle a sub-hed somehow -->

# Talkin' shop

Whenever building something, it's very important to continue the age-old tradition of taking time to talk about working instead of actually working. Let's talk shop.

I love listening to people talk about the finer points of their craft, about their tools and their techniques. It showcases their expertise, hints at their countless mistakes and experiments, and gives me a glimpse into how they think about their craft. Beautiful stuff.

<!-- each preference has been chiseled by countless mistakes, each opinion sculpted by small experiments. -->

I want to talk shop as I build this app because I think writing will help sharpen and crystalize my own thinking. It will also leave a record I can look back on later to learn where my thinking held up and where it fell through.

Who knows? You might even enjoy reading it, too.

## Where to begin?

Software developers love talking shop. Of the countless reasons why, two of the most significant are 1) there are an incredible number of tools and techniques available, and 2) there's no right answer.

Here's a dump of some of the tools I've checked out while deciding what I'll use to build the app:

- React
- Lit
- NextJS
- Svelte
- Django
- Node
- Deno
- Bun
- Go
- Python
- MySQL
- Postgres
- SQLite
- Firebase
- Mongo
- CouchDB
- Replicache
- Automerge
- Yjs
- Google Domains
- Namecheap
- Markdown
- Supabase
- Cloud Run
- Firebase Hosting
- Fly.io
- Heroku
- Vercel
- Cloudflare Workers
- Flutter
- React Native
- Ionic
- Capacitor
- Swift
- Java/Kotlin

Knowing what any of those tools is doesn't matter. The point is there are ton of ways to build an app. Which do you choose? There is no right answer.

Begin at the beginning: What am I building?

## What I'm building: tech priorities

I'm building beautiful, remixable checklists. An app seems the best way to build that. Let's break down the app's priorities.

### Must haves

The app must:

- Prioritize **Accessibility**, which is the term coders use to describe how many people can access their website/app/whatever, regardless of the user's color blindness, epilepsy, blindness, deafness, etc.
- **Be fast** even when used on a older phone or on a poor network connection
- Work **Offline** to allow you to view and update your checklists whenever, wherever so you can add "bug spray" to your list even while you're out camping and never forget to pack it again
- **Respect privacy** by providing you clear options and information, including ways to view, download, upload, and delete your own data
- **Simplify** wherever possible

### Should haves

The app should:

- Maintain **robust code tests** to earn confidence that the app works as expected, even after its code changes
- **Facilitate coordination** among you and the people you care about
- Make **searching and tagging** your lists feel natural
- **Navigate complexity** if you want it: keyboard shortcuts and navigation, formulas and conditions, etc.
- **Consider incentives** because they influence behavior whether you're conscious of them or not

### Nice to haves

It'd sure be nice if the app could:

- **Support custom styles** with "templates" or "skins"
- **Predict your needs** with search suggestions or suggested items/lists to help streamline your experience
- **Enable external manipulation** with APIs, webhooks, etc.
- **Standalone specification** for the list's structure and functionality so others could theoretically build on the spec in a separate apps, APIs, components, etc.
  - While I don't think others building on any such spec is likely to happen, I think it'd be valuable to build with other use cases in mind
- **Send prompts** where useful and if you've opted-in; for example, a prompt to review a checklist pattern soon after using it for any adjustments that can improve it for future use

### Won't haves

The app will not:

- Support **end-to-end encryption** or similarly high levels of security, so you should not use it for sensitive or private matters
  - This is a endlessly complex area that I have no expertise in

<!-- - Frontend -->
<!-- ("Frontend" is the term software folks use to describe the code/systems that makes up the interface the end user interacts with. Right now, you're reading this on the frontend.) Maybe make this a footnote? -->
<!-- - Backend -->
<!-- - ("Backend" is the term we use to describe the code/systems that end users don't interact with directly, typically to simplify their frontend experience and to keep their actions safely separated from other users' experiences and data.) Maybe make this a footnote? -->

<!-- Software costs little to create and even less to distribute, so people make a lot of it. -->

## Shop Talking

As I've gained experience and grown as a software developer, I've come to love talking shop.

It has taken time to enjoy, mostly because there is so much to know before you can compare and contrast effectively. I've learned about coding patterns, about the underlying technologies that make up the technologies we're actually talking about (everything boils down to sand), about what has and hasn't worked for me. There's a ton to know, and I don't even know all that much!

Learning is a lot of the fun of talking shop, though!
